# Programming a FABulous fabric with VPR

VPR (Versatile Place and Route) is a place and route tool from the VTR project that can be used to program a fabric generated by FABulous, using either Yosys or ODIN II for the logic synthesis. The VTR genfasm tool can then be used to generate a fasm file from which the bitstream can be generated.

To generate the necessary materials to program using VPR, run $FABulous\_root/fabric\_generator/fabric\_gen.py with the -genVPRModel flag. In the $FABulous\_root/fabric\_generator/vproutput directory, two files will be created - architecture.xml and routing\_resources.xml. architecture.xml contains a description of the various tiles, ports and BELs - everything in the architecture except for the routing resources. These routing resources are specified in the routing\_resources.xml file, which contains a graph within which the nodes are routing wires and ports, and the edges are the switch matrix interconnects that connect these resources.

To run the flow with ODIN II, the run\_vtr\_flow.py script in $VTR\_ROOT/vtr\_flow/scripts can be used, passing in your verilog circuit, followed by the genfasm utility.

To use Yosys (recommended with FABulous for improved functionality), the Yosys flow found in $FABulous\_root/YosysFiles/VPR\_flow/vpr.ys can be used, which will output a Berkely Logic Interchange Format (BLIF) file, which can be used as an argument for the VPR executable, followed by the genfasm utility. More documentation on how to use this flow can be found in $FABulous\_root/YosysFiles/VPR\_flow/README.md

When generating the VPR model, FABulous will print out a maximum width for routing channels in the form `Max Width: <max_width>`. This number should be noted, as it will be used as an argument when calling VPR.

To run the VPR flow (with VPR 8.1.0 installed) , the following command can be used:

`vpr <architecture.xml> <circuit.blif> --read_rr_graph <routing_resources.xml> --route_chan_width <max_width>`

<architecture.xml> and <routing\_resources.xml> should be paths to the corresponding files in $FABulous\_root/fabric\_generator/vproutput. `--disp on` can be appended to the end if a GUI is desired.

To generate FASM, you should then use the command:

`genfasm <architecture.xml> <circuit.blif> --read_rr_graph <routing_resources.xml> --route_chan_width <max_width>` 

The genfasm utility is part of the VTR flow, so should be installed alongside VPR. While the two commands are very similar, both must be called in sequence.

## Adding custom XML

The auto-generated XML that FABulous creates for different BELs cannot cover all cases - for example, a BEL might depend on special functionality within VPR or require use of standard BLIF primitives, making it impractical to use as a blackbox. In this case, custom XML can be inserted when certain BELs are encountered. To do this, store the corresponding XML for the pb\_type, including the opening and closing tags, in the structure specialBelDict, with the key being the name of the BEL that should be replaced. This is particularly flexible as the XML doesn't have to be inserted directly into the code - extra code can be added to generate this XML if desired. In order to generate FASM, and therefore a bitstream, with your architecture, it may be necessary to add FASM prefixes if your BEL has more than one instance. This allows the bitstream generator to understand which BEL a certain feature is being enabled/set on. FABulous handles the actual prefixes itself, but the metadata tag itself must be provided by the user in case there is other metadata to be supplied. Where you wish to insert the metadata, simply write:

`    <metadata>
     <meta name="fasm_prefix"> {fasm_prefix_list} </meta>
    </metadata>`

and add any other desired metadata within the metadata tag. When producing the architecture specification, FABulous will automatically replace {fasm\_prefix\_list} with the necessary prefixes to meet the bitstream specification, using the num\_pb value within your XML to decide how many prefixes are necessary (due to this, please avoid unnecessary whitespace when you set this attribute - it should be of the form num\_pb="integer").

If a BEL is found in the specialBelDict, there are two other features that can be used to ensure everything fits together as desired. If this pb\_type also requires custom model XML, this can be inserted into specialModelDict, once again with the name of the BEL as the key and including the model tag. Only model XML provided here will be added - the default is not to generate anything for special BELs. This may be useful if the BEL you are representing does not use a standard BLIF primitive, and still requires a matching model. 

Similarly, there is a specialInterconnectDict, which can be used to insert special interconnect XML into the interconnect tag of the top-level pb\_type that houses the BEL. Note that in this case, you should not include the interconnect tag in your XML, as it will be inserted within an interconnect tag. This may be useful, for example, when generating custom XML for BELs that require a clock input, so that the clock signal can be routed into the BEL. The key in the dict should be the name of the BEL that the corresponding custom pb\_type XML is for.


## Notes for developers

The ptc number provided for each node in the routing resource (RR) graph represents the pin, track or class of the node. With SOURCE, SINK, IPIN and OPIN nodes, this is the ptc of the appropriate pin in the block type definition, however with CHANY and CHANX nodes it is more arbitrary. Here, each wire's ptc number should be different from any wire it overlaps with **anywhere along its length**. Currently, for simplicity's sake, we simply assign a different ptc number to every wire on the fabric. More information can be found in this Google Group discussion:

[VTR Users PTC discussion]https://groups.google.com/g/vtr-users/c/ZFXPn-W3SxA/m/ROkfD2oEAQAJ

Although no meaningful routing connections are specified in the architecture.xml file, it is important that all pins do not have an Fc value of 0. This is because VPR uses the Fc value to gauge how well connected to the fabric a pin is, and so will not be able to find routing candidates with 0 Fc pins. Currently FABulous is set up with a default fractional Fc of 1 such that all pins are connected to the fabric and are viable candidates.


